Standard Fixed-length Vector Calling Convention Variant (#418)
riscv-non-isa/riscv-elf-psabi-doc: riscv-cc.adoc

Floating-point registers fs0-fs11 shall be preserved across procedure calls,
provided they hold values no more than ABI_FLEN bits wide.

> === Standard Fixed-length Vector Calling Convention Variant

Reviewer: The variant itself seems fine, modulo nits, but how are we planning to enable it?

If it's automatically used by `-march=rva23 -mabi=ilp32d` that will create major compatibility issues for binary distributions that use a fixed ABI and allow mixing packages at different architecture levels (either as an explicit user action, or as an implementation detail when rebuilding the distribution to change the architecture requirement).

If a new `-mabi=` value is required to enable use of the variant, it will be usable on closed systems where all packages are built at once, but not on binary distributions, since there is no expectation that binary code built with different `-mabi=` options is interoperable at all.  This will include Debian and Alpine and might include Android and Fedora if their ABIs are finalized prior to the acceptance of this PR.

If it's enabled on a per-function basis using an attribute, or automatically for functions not visible across DSO boundaries, then it's effectively part of the definition of the attribute or a compiler implementation detail and may belong in riscv-c-api-doc or gccint, not here.

This section defines the calling convention variant for fixed-length vectors.
The intention of this variant is to pass fixed-length vectors via the vector
register. For the definition of a fixed-length vector, see
<<Fixed-length vector>>.

This variant is based on the standard vector calling convention variant:
the register convention and the rules for passing arguments and return values
are the same.

NOTE: The reason we define a separate calling convention variant is that we
would like to define a flexible convention to utilize the variable length
feature in the vector extension, also considering embedded vector extensions,
such as zve32x.

ABI_VLEN refers to the width of a vector register in the calling convention

> variant.

Reviewer 2: Will ABI_VLEN be used as a condition to determine whether two object files can be linked? For example, if the ABI_VLEN of one object file is 128 and the other is 256, should the link between them be successful?

The ABI_VLEN must be no wider than the ISA's VLEN, meaning that the ISA may
support wider vector registers than the ABI, but the ABI's VLEN cannot exceed
the ISA's VLEN.

The ABI_VLEN is a parameter of this calling convention variant. It could be set
by the command line option for the compiler or specified by the function
attribute in the source code.

NOTE: We suggest the toolchain implementation set the default value of ABI_VLEN
to 128, as it's the most common minimal requirement. However, it is not fixed
to 128, since the ISA allows the VLEN to be only 32 bits or 64 bits. This
also enables the utilization of the capacity of longer VLEN. Users can build
with an optimized library with larger ABI_VLEN for better utilization of those
cores with longer VLEN.

A fixed-length vector argument is passed in a vector argument register if the
size of the vector is less than ABI_VLEN bit.

> A fixed-length vector argument is passed in two vector argument registers,

Reviewer 3: I assume if the hardware VLEN is larger than ABI_VLEN, the elements past ABI_VLEN will continue filling the first register. Since VLEN and ABI_VLEN are both powers of 2, VLEN must be >= 2*ABI_VLEN so no elements are in the second register.

Reviewer 2: Indeed, so it's better if the `continue filling the first register` rule is described in this proposal.

similar to vector data arguments with LMUL=2, if the size of the vector is
greater than ABI_VLEN bit and less than or equal to 2×ABI_VLEN bit.

A fixed-length vector argument is passed in four vector argument registers,
similar to vector data arguments with LMUL=4, if the size of the vector is
greater than 2×ABI_VLEN bit and less than or equal to 4×ABI_VLEN bit.

A fixed-length vector argument is passed in eight vector argument registers,
similar to vector data arguments with LMUL=8, if the size of the vector is
greater than 4×ABI_VLEN bit and less than or equal to 8×ABI_VLEN bit.

A struct containing members with all fixed-length vectors will be passed in
vector argument registers like a vector tuple type if all members have the
same length, the length is less or equal to 8×ABI_VLEN bit, and the size of
the whole struct is less than 8×ABI_VLEN bit. Otherwise, it will use the rule

> defined in the hardware floating-point calling convention.

Author: Good catch, I tend to pass that by reference like tuple-type in vector calling convention, will added more word to clarify that.

A struct containing just one fixed-length vector array is passed as though it
were a vector tuple type if the size of the base element for the array is less
or equal to 8×ABI_VLEN bit, and the size of the array is less than 8×ABI_VLEN
bit. Otherwise, it will use the rule defined in the hardware floating-point
calling convention.

A fixed-length vector argument is passed by reference and is replaced in the
argument list with the address if it is larger than 8×ABI_VLEN bit or if

> there is a shortage of vector argument registers.

Reviewer 2: This paragraph looks a little more coherent when it's moved below line 385. Because they are both rules describing a single fixed-length vector argument.

> there is a shortage of vector argument registers.

Reviewer: Given ABI_VLEN=128 and XLEN=64, if all vector argument registers are used, a fixed-length vector argument of length 128 will be passed by reference, but a single-member struct with the same will be passed in two integer registers.  Is this a deliberate break from the base ABIs which try to always pass single-member structs the same as their content?

Author: I was thinking let it fallback as base ABI, but I realized their may has some scenario is that may put within a POD class for easier operation, so I think we should consider that case as well.

all vector registers. Hence, the standard vector calling convention variant
won't disrupt the `jmp_buf` ABI.

NOTE: Functions that use the standard vector calling convention
variant follow an additional name mangling rule for {Cpp}.
For more details, see <<Name Mangling for Standard Calling Convention Variant>>.

=== Standard Fixed-length Vector Calling Convention Variant

This section defines the calling convention variant for fixed-length vectors.
The intention of this variant is to pass fixed-length vectors via the vector

> register. For the definition of a fixed-length vector, see

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
registers. For the definition of a fixed-length vector, see
```

<<Fixed-length vector>>.

This variant is based on the standard vector calling convention variant:
the register convention and the rules for passing arguments and return values
are the same.

NOTE: The reason we define a separate calling convention variant is that we
would like to define a flexible convention to utilize the variable length
feature in the vector extension, also considering embedded vector extensions,
such as `Zve32x`.

ABI_VLEN refers to the width of a vector register in the calling convention
variant.

The ABI_VLEN must be no wider than the ISA's VLEN, meaning that the ISA may
support wider vector registers than the ABI, but the ABI's VLEN cannot exceed
the ISA's VLEN.

> ABI_VLEN represents the width (in bits) of the vector register available in the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
ABI_VLEN represents the width (in bits) of the vector registers available in the
```

calling convention for fixed-length vectors. ABI_VLEN can vary from 32 bits
(as in `Zve32x`) up to the maximum supported by the ISA. The flexibility of
ABI_VLEN enables the convention to adapt to both low-end embedded systems and
high-performance processors that utilize wider vector registers.

The ABI_VLEN is a parameter of this calling convention variant. It could be set

> by the command line option for the compiler or specified by the function

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
by a command line option for the compiler or specified by a function
```

attribute in the source code.

> NOTE: We suggest the toolchain implementation set the default value of ABI_VLEN

Reviewer 3: This isn't possible unless V or Zvl128b is in the ISA string since ABI_VLEN must be less than or equal to the ISA VLEN.

Author: Drop those non-mandatory note to prevent confusing, and let this part leave to toolchian convention  or c-api to document that

to 128, as it's the most common minimal requirement. However, it is not fixed
to 128, since the ISA allows the VLEN to be only 32 bits or 64 bits. This
also enables the utilization of the capacity of longer VLEN. Users can build
with an optimized library with larger ABI_VLEN for better utilization of those
cores with longer VLEN.

> A fixed-length vector argument is passed in a vector argument register if the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A fixed-length vector argument is passed in one vector argument register if the
```

To increase the similarity with "two", "four", and "eight" below.

size of the vector is less than or equal to ABI_VLEN bit.

[NOTE]
===
Even in the absence of specific vector extension support for certain element
types, such as `__bf16`, `_Float16`, `float`, or `double`, the standard
fixed-length vector calling convention rules still apply. For example,
even without the support of extensions like `Zvfbfmin`, `Zve32f`, or `Zve64d`,
these element types will be passed according to the calling convention rules
outlined here.

Additionally, data types such as `__int128_t`, which currently do not
have direct support in any vector extension, will also follow these rules.
This design ensures that the calling convention remains forward-compatible,
minimizing the need for continuous adjustments as new extensions and data types
are introduced in the future.

The consistency in applying these rules to unsupported element types guarantees
a smooth transition when future vector extensions become available, allowing for
seamless integration of new features without requiring significant changes to
the calling convention.
===

> A fixed-length vector argument is passed in two vector argument registers,

Reviewer 3: Are these registers aligned to be a valid LMUL=2 register group?

Author: Add few sentence to say it follow the same register constraint, also for LMUL 4 and LMUL 8

similar to vector data arguments with LMUL=2, if the size of the vector is
greater than ABI_VLEN bit and less than or equal to 2×ABI_VLEN bit.

A fixed-length vector argument is passed in four vector argument registers,
similar to vector data arguments with LMUL=4, if the size of the vector is
greater than 2×ABI_VLEN bit and less than or equal to 4×ABI_VLEN bit.

A fixed-length vector argument is passed in eight vector argument registers,
similar to vector data arguments with LMUL=8, if the size of the vector is

> greater than 4×ABI_VLEN bit and less than or equal to 8×ABI_VLEN bit.

Reviewer 3: `bit` -> `bits`    in two places on this line

[NOTE]
===
Fixed-length vectors that are not a power-of-2 in size will be rounded up to
the next power-of-2 length for the purpose of register allocation and handling.
For instance, a vector type like `int32x3_t` (which contains three 32-bit

> integers) will be treated as an `int32x4_t` (a 128-bit vector, as LMUL=1) in

Reviewer 3: The LMUL=1 reference here is dependent on ABI_VLEN right?

- The vector's total size is 96 bits, which is not a power of 2.
- The ABI will round up the size to 128 bits (corresponding to `int32x4_t`),
  meaning the vector will be passed using one vector argument register when
  ABI_VLEN=128.

This rule applies to all non-power-of-2 fixed-length vectors, ensuring they
are treated consistently across different ABI_VLEN settings.
===

A fixed-length vector argument is passed by reference and is replaced in the
argument list with the address if it is larger than 8×ABI_VLEN bit or if
there is a shortage of vector argument registers.

A struct containing members with all fixed-length vectors will be passed in
vector argument registers like a vector tuple type if all members have the
same length, the length is less than or equal to 4×ABI_VLEN bit, and the size of
the whole struct is less than or equal to 8×ABI_VLEN bit.
If there are not enough vector argument registers to pass the entire struct,
it will pass by reference and is replaced in the argument list with the address.
Otherwise, it will use the rule defined in the hardware floating-point calling
convention.

A struct containing just one fixed-length vector or a fixed-length vector

> array of length one, it will be flattened as a single fixed-length vector argument

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
array of length one, will be flattened as a single fixed-length vector argument
```

The comma should maybe be removed as well.

if the size of the vector is less than or equal to 8×ABI_VLEN bit.

> Struct with zero-length fixed-length arrays use the rule defined in the hardware

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Structs with zero-length fixed-length arrays use the rule defined in the hardware
```

Or "A struct"

floating-point calling convention, which means it won't consume vector argument

> register eitehr in C or {Cpp}.

Reviewer 3: either*

> register eitehr in C or {Cpp}.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
register either in C or {Cpp}.
```

A struct containing just one fixed-length vector array is passed as though it
were a vector tuple type if the size of the base element for the array is less than
or equal to 8×ABI_VLEN bit, and the size of the array is less than 8×ABI_VLEN

> bit.

Reviewer 3: `bit` -> `bits`

> bit.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
bits.
```

are the same.

NOTE: The reason we define a separate calling convention variant is that we
would like to define a flexible convention to utilize the variable length
feature in the vector extension, also considering embedded vector extensions,
such as zve32x.

ABI_VLEN refers to the width of a vector register in the calling convention
variant.

The ABI_VLEN must be no wider than the ISA's VLEN, meaning that the ISA may
support wider vector registers than the ABI, but the ABI's VLEN cannot exceed
the ISA's VLEN.

The ABI_VLEN is a parameter of this calling convention variant. It could be set
by the command line option for the compiler or specified by the function
attribute in the source code.

NOTE: We suggest the toolchain implementation set the default value of ABI_VLEN
to 128, as it's the most common minimal requirement. However, it is not fixed
to 128, since the ISA allows the VLEN to be only 32 bits or 64 bits. This
also enables the utilization of the capacity of longer VLEN. Users can build
with an optimized library with larger ABI_VLEN for better utilization of those
cores with longer VLEN.

A fixed-length vector argument is passed in a vector argument register if the

> size of the vector is less than ABI_VLEN bit.

Reviewer 4: Should this be "no more than ABI_VLEN bits"?

A fixed-length vector argument is passed in two vector argument registers,
similar to vector data arguments with LMUL=2, if the size of the vector is
greater than ABI_VLEN bit and less than or equal to 2×ABI_VLEN bit.

A fixed-length vector argument is passed in four vector argument registers,
similar to vector data arguments with LMUL=4, if the size of the vector is
greater than 2×ABI_VLEN bit and less than or equal to 4×ABI_VLEN bit.

A fixed-length vector argument is passed in eight vector argument registers,
similar to vector data arguments with LMUL=8, if the size of the vector is
greater than 4×ABI_VLEN bit and less than or equal to 8×ABI_VLEN bit.

A fixed-length vector argument is passed by reference and is replaced in the
argument list with the address if it is larger than 8×ABI_VLEN bit or if
there is a shortage of vector argument registers.

A struct containing members with all fixed-length vectors will be passed in
vector argument registers like a vector tuple type if all members have the

> same length, the length is less or equal to 8×ABI_VLEN bit, and the size of

Reviewer 5: Is a struct with single fixed-length vector considered as tuple type? e.g. { <2 x i32> }.

> same length, the length is less or equal to 8×ABI_VLEN bit, and the size of

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
same length, the length is less than or equal to 8×ABI_VLEN bit, and the size of
```

Reviewer 5: Since the struct would have >=2 elements here, so I think the length can't be `8xABI_VLEN`.

> the whole struct is less than 8×ABI_VLEN bit.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
the whole struct is less than or equal to 8×ABI_VLEN bit.
```

If there are not enough vector argument registers to pass the entire struct,
it will pass by reference and is replaced in the argument list with the address.
Otherwise, it will use the rule defined in the hardware floating-point calling
convention.

> A struct containing just one fixed-length vector or on fixed-length vector

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
A struct containing just one fixed-length vector or a fixed-length vector
```

> array of length one, it will flattening as a single fixed-length vector argument

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
array of length one, it will be flattened as a single fixed-length vector argument
```

if the size of the vector is less than or equal to 8×ABI_VLEN bit.

Struct with zero-length fixed-length arrays use the rule defined in the hardware
floating-point calling convention, which means it won't consume vector argument
register eitehr in C or {Cpp}.

A struct containing just one fixed-length vector array is passed as though it

> were a vector tuple type if the size of the base element for the array is less

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
were a vector tuple type if the size of the base element for the array is less than
```

> or equal to 8×ABI_VLEN bit, and the size of the array is less than 8×ABI_VLEN

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
or equal to 4×ABI_VLEN bit, and the size of the array is less than or equal to 8×ABI_VLEN
```

Reviewer 5: Since the array would have >=2 elements here, so I think the length can't be 8xABI_VLEN.

Author: Array with length 1 is legal :P

cores with longer VLEN.

A fixed-length vector argument is passed in a vector argument register if the

> size of the vector is no more than ABI_VLEN bits.

Reviewer 4: I just want to double check, I wasn't concerned about the wording but it seemed to me like it should be `vec_size <= ABI_VLEN` and not `vec_size < ABI_VLEN`. Unless that was intentional?

Author: Yeah, and I guess I should say something like that to prevent ambiguous:
```suggestion
size of the vector is less than or equal to ABI_VLEN bit.
```
